---
title: Um
author: Kerim
layout: post
permalink: /archives/2004/01/12/um/
categories:
  - Info Tech
  - Language
---
> Though a bane to teachers of public speaking, people around the world fill pauses in their own languages as naturally as watermelons have seeds. In Britain they say *uh* but spell it *er*, just as they pronounce *er* in butter.
> 
> The French say something that sounds like *euh*, and Hebrew speakers say *ehhh*. Serbs and Croats say *ovay*, and the Turks *saymmmmm*. The Japanese say *eto* (eh-to) and *ano* (ah-no), the Spanish *este*, and Mandarin speakers *neige* (NEH-guh) and *jiege* (JEH-guh). In Dutch and German you can say *uh, um, mmm*. In Swedish it&#8217;s *eh, ah, aah, m, mm, hmm, ooh, a* and *oh*; in Norwegian, *e, eh, m* and *hm*.

It seems that these *disfluencies* are a <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2004/01/03/arts/03TANK.html?ei=5007&#38;en=8fbdb36611f41163&#38;ex=1388552400&#38;partner=USERLAND&#38;pagewanted=print&#38;position=" onclick="_gaq.push(['_trackEvent', 'outbound-article', 'http://www.nytimes.com/2004/01/03/arts/03TANK.html?ei=5007&en=8fbdb36611f41163&ex=1388552400&partner=USERLAND&pagewanted=print&position=', 'major problem for speech recognition engines']);" >major problem for speech recognition engines</a>. There are also some interesting theories about the role that they play. It seems that the sounds aren&#8217;t completely, um, random &#8230; but signal information about pauses later in the sentence.

> By far the newest &#8212; and most controversial &#8212; idea comes from Herbert Clark, a psychologist at Stanford, and Jean Fox Tree, a psychologist at the University of California, Santa Cruz, who determined that speakers use (and listeners understand) *uh* and *um* in distinct ways. *Uh* signals a forthcoming pause that will be short, while um signals a longer pause, she said. *Uh* and *um* are not acoustic accidents, but full-fledged words that signal a delay yet to come.

