---
title: Oil
author: Kerim
layout: post
permalink: /archives/2004/05/01/oil/
categories:
  - Politics
  - The Economy
---
Tom Dispatch has <a href="http://www.nationinstitute.org/tomdispatch/index.mhtml?pid=1409" onclick="_gaq.push(['_trackEvent', 'outbound-article', 'http://www.nationinstitute.org/tomdispatch/index.mhtml?pid=1409', 'two very important articles']);" >two very important articles</a> about oil:

(1) Saudi promises to cut oil prices (as reported by Bob Woodward) should be taken with a grain of salt:

> Note the complete exclusion of U.S. energy companies in all prominent new Saudi energy ventures; this is hardly consistent with an ostensible pledge to flood the market with oil around October to guarantee the election of a President viewed to be fundamentally hostile to Islamic interests by the vast majority of OPEC nations. It is equally salient that the officially stated OPEC price range of $22-$28 per barrel has largely been ignored by virtually all OPEC members (judging from the extent to which they are producing above agreed quota numbers) &#8211; not only because higher prices can be sustained in spite of this widespread &#8220;cheating&#8221; on quotas, but also because of growing opposition among its members to American policies in the Middle East.
> 
> &#8230;Given that the Saudis and the Russians are two of the world&#8217;s largest oil suppliers, the effects of their de facto alliance cannot be overestimated. 

(2) The administration&#8217;s stated goals of removing oil subsidies for Iraqis could worsen the already volatile situation:

> Many of the ethnic and religious tensions &#8212; among Kurds in the north, Shia Arabs in the South and Sunni Arabs in between &#8212; have traditionally revolved around the control of major oilfields. But there is one thing all Iraqis can agree on &#8212; the country&#8217;s oil belongs to Iraqis. Last August, when shortages drove up gas prices in Basra, the until-then peaceful Shia population took to the streets in a violent, deadly, weeklong protest against Coalition troops. Removing the subsidy for good would certainly incite far worse.
> 
> This has already led to disagreements between CPA planners and the Iraqis in its hand-picked Governing Council over when and how to remove the subsidy. 

And there is reason to worry, look at Haiti and Nigeria, for instance:

> In 2003, the IMF urged Haiti to eliminate its petroleum subsidies and to allow the price of gas to be determined by market forces. Because the IMF promised a $50 million loan as a reward, the small, coup-prone country obliged. The price of gasoline and cooking fuel promptly soared 130 %, causing nationwide strikes and violent protests against the government of Bertrand Aristide in which a student was killed.
> 
> Similarly, riots threatened to interfere with President Bush&#8217;s trip to Nigeria last July after the oil-rich West African country dropped its gasoline subsidy in an attempt to woo the IMF back into a lending relationship with it. Indonesia? The same pattern occurred there in 1998: Fuel prices surged 71 % after subsidies were cut at the behest of the IMF, triggering street riots, which left two dead.

Of course, the war in Iraq is about &#8220;freedom,&#8221; not oil, so none of this really matters.

