---
title: Partner
author: Kerim
layout: post
permalink: /archives/2004/01/29/partner/
categories:
  - Politics
---
So <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2004/01/29/politics/campaign/29DEAN.html?pagewanted=print&#38;position=" onclick="_gaq.push(['_trackEvent', 'outbound-article', 'http://www.nytimes.com/2004/01/29/politics/campaign/29DEAN.html?pagewanted=print&position=', 'Dean fired his campaign manager Joe Trippi']);" >Dean fired his campaign manager Joe Trippi</a>, which I can understand. But why on earth is he still using Joe Trippi&#8217;s media company to produce his campaign&#8217;s advertisements? Everyone says they suck. There must be something wrong with them, since they cost millions more than Kerry&#8217;s ads, but don&#8217;t work.

> Figures from a rival campaign, confirmed by the independent Campaign Media Analysis Group, which tracks advertising spending, show that Dr. Dean has spent roughly $9.2 million in advertising since June, more than $2 million above the next highest advertiser, Senator John Kerry, who spent $6.9 million, the figures show. Nearly $6 million of Dr. Dean&#8217;s campaign money went to advertisements in Iowa and New Hampshire, where Dr. Dean finished third and second, respectively

And did Dean&#8217;s supporters know that Joe Trippi was collecting commissions of up to 15% on those $9.2 million (in leu of salary)?

> Tricia Enright, the campaign&#8217;s communications director, said Dr. Dean was forming &#8220;a new creative team&#8221; to overhaul its television advertisements. She said the campaign was not firing its media firm, in which Mr. Trippi is a partner. Many Dean supporters have been critical of the ad campaign, particularly in Iowa. Some questioned the arrangements by which Mr. Trippi forfeited a salary as a campaign manager but collected commissions &#8212; said to be as high as 15 percent in some cases &#8212; based on advertising buys.

That&#8217;s a lot of Dean&#8217;s supporters money going directly to Joe Trippi for lousy ads.

(Thanks to T.F.!)

